---
title: Reading Response 1
subtitle: AEC 351, W2022
author: Thomas Knudson
date: Sunday, January 23, 2022
papersize: a4
geometry: margin=2cm
header-includes: |
    \usepackage{fancyhdr}
    \pagestyle{fancy}
    \fancyhead[RO,RE]{AEC 351, W2022}
    \fancyhead[CO,CE]{RR1}
    \fancyhead[LO,LE]{Knudson}
---

## Prompt

> $$\ $$ Using complete sentences, in your own words explain how Baumeister and Kilian (2016) define an oil price shock.

$$\ $$

## Response

> $$\ $$

I would claim that Baumeister and Kilian provide the most succint definition of an oil price shock on page 141[^-1]: "[the] gap between the price of oil that [is] expected and its [actual] outcome." While the actualized price of oil is empirical, expectations are normative. Baumeister and Kilian demonstrate this by detailing how four major agents predict flucuations to the price. These four major categories of economic agents are: Economists, Policymakers, the Financial Market, and Consumers (firms and households).

While each of these agents have varying levels of sophistication in their modeling of future oil prices and predict--sometimes drastically--different trends, they all experience *shocks*. The impact for each category is directly tied to the magnitude of disagreement between their predictions and reality.

These shocks, both positive and negative, can occur as each model--even the Financial Market--has its limitations and must make assumptions somewhere. Even in the physical sciences, there exists systems which cannot be modeled exactly, either due to computational complexity (statisical mechanics) or due to lack of an analytic solution. A perfect example of the former is beautifully illustrated by YouTuber *braintruffle*'s educational series[^-2] on creating a fluid simulation; the creator easily demonstrates why specific properties of a particle must be averaged out in order to provide a simulation that completes on reasonable timescales. For the latter, there does not currently exist any analytical solution to Einstein's field equations for describing two massive objects near eachother. Time-dependent approximate solutions can be formulated, but all suffer from numerical instability and invetiably produce unusable results beyond certain timescales.

[^-1]: Baumeister, Christiane, and Lutz Kilian. 2016. "Forty years of oil price fluctuations: Why the price of oil may still surprise usLinks to an external site.." Journal of Economic Perspectives 30(1): 139-60.

[^-2]: https://www.youtube.com/c/braintruffle/featured