---
title: Reading Response 6
subtitle: AEC 351, W2022
author: Thomas Knudson
papersize: a4
geometry: margin=2cm
header-includes: |
    \usepackage{fancyhdr}
    \pagestyle{fancy}
    \fancyhead[RO,RE]{AEC 351, W2022}
    \fancyhead[CO,CE]{RR6}
    \fancyhead[LO,LE]{Knudson}
---

Prevalence elasticity is the method in which economic epidemiology seeks to model how agents change their behaviour in response to variable risk. General SIR models do not take this effect into account and only model the spread through changes in infection rate. Since most epidemics require a form of human interaction to spread from contagious to susceptible people, accounting for these changes in human behaviour is necessary for better predictions and hypotheses regarding the outcomes of an epidemic.

Economically, this behaviour change reflects the agent's change in cost-benefit analysis as risks to their well-being vary. As Bedson et al. discuss, the set of models that do attempt to account for effects of human interaction assume a "static structure with fixed behaviour, knowledge and contact [pattern]." While not the direct intent of the video, I think Grant Sanderson's (3Blue1Brown) video from March 27, 2020 offers a nice companion piece in exploring the impact of an epidemic by implementing changes to the behaviour in the model. As discussed in Sanderson's conclusion, these changes still fall back upon Bedson et al.'s observations, as they are implemented *globally* and don't reflect how individual agents might act with respect to risk-aversion or risk-taking.

The inaccuracy in most of these models come from assuming uniform behaviour and complete compliance to directives with respect to reducing the infection rate. As is anecdotally evident from the present term at Oregon State University, not all agents respond to the prevalence of an epidemic in a similar manner.

---

[1] Bedson, J., Skrip, L.A., Pedi, D. et al. A review and agenda for integrated disease models including social and behavioural factors. Nat Hum Behav 5, 834–846 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-021-01136-2

[2] Sanderson, G. Simulating an epidemic. YouTube, Accessed March 13, 2022. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gxAaO2rsdIs