---
title: Reading Response 1
subtitle: AEC 353, W2022
author: Thomas Knudson
date: Sunday, January 23, 2022
papersize: a4
geometry: margin=2cm
header-includes: |
    \usepackage{fancyhdr}
    \pagestyle{fancy}
    \fancyhead[RO,RE]{AEC 353, W2022}
    \fancyhead[CO,CE]{RR1}
    \fancyhead[LO,LE]{Knudson}
---

## Prompt

> $$\ $$ In your own original writing, explain why containerization was an important form of technological change for international shipping in the 20th century.

$$\ $$

## Response

> $$\ $$

Containers allowed for massive bulk movement of goods at the biggest bottleneck: the sea-land interface[^1]. Much in the way that coal power fueled the industrial revolution by giving access to consistent, on demand, and more powerful mechanical work, containers allowed for faster loading/unloading of goods at the port. Paul Krugman summarizes this in his special lecture:

> "What was the big bottleneck was getting things on and off the ships. A large part of the costs of international trade was taking the cargo off the ship, sorting it out, and dealing with the pilferage that always took place along the way. [...] it was the container, which could be hauled off a ship and put onto a truck or a train and moved on." 

As a personal anecdote, the use of shipping containers made the logistics of moving gear for the military a breeze. My engineering company consisted of three platoons, all with slightly diffferent tasks and destinations; each group was given one shipping container to load with their necessary equipment. Contrasting this with each individual's gear (at least 3 bags), the containers were exceedingly efficient. At each point transfer point for personel, all $3$ bags for the $80+$ personel had to be unloaded, sorted, and re-loaded.

To qualitatively describe the difference in transportation of goods, we can construct a simplified model for estimating the chance of a possible logisitical error. As a liberity, if we assume the human reading labels has a $0.01\%$ change of commiting an error, at each transfer point we have:

$$0.01\%\text{ per item} \begin{pmatrix} 3\text{ containers} \\ 240\text{ bags} \end{pmatrix} \approx \begin{pmatrix}0.03\% \\ 2.4\%\end{pmatrix}$$

Note that the probabilities are additive as the chance of one error occuring is not dependent on the outcome of the other events.

[^1]: From 2.2. Economic effects of containerization, Page 39.

    Bernhofen, Daniel M., Zouheir El-Sahli, and Richard Kneller. 2016. "Estimating the effects of the container revolution on world trade." Journal of International Economics 98: 36-50. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jinteco.2015.09.001