# 2021 MAY 06


## My Agenda

- MTH 537 Update
- Briefly Entertain Ch 3 Exercise 10?
- Little bit of Project B
- Chapter 4?


### MTH 537 Update

We recently discussed different geometries: Rindler and Kruskal and their maximal extensions. The main idea was leveraging careful transformations to allow continuous transitions from 'wedges' (across the Horizon).

Midterm was yesterday and on it, we explored the Charged BH geometry using the Reissner–Nordström metric. The notable difference is that there are three regions (two horizons) for the case of $q < m$ and the speed of a stone goes to $0$ as *measured* by a shell observer before reaching the singularity.

The bookkeeper's results are consistent with the results for Schwarzschild geometry - but not at $r=2m$, since the horizon is actually at $r=m+\sqrt{m^2-q^2}$ for $q<m$. I have plots for these situations.

Questions:

- The line element (metric) has $q$ for the charge of the black hole, but nothing seems to show up in the geodesics as interacting with the stone or depending on the stones charge. Does this imply that the base set of tools assume a stone is neutrally charged?


### Project B

Query 8:

The increasing magnitude of the curvature factor is canceled out by the length contraction of the rain frame.

### Chapter 4

Circular orbits can only occur at two radii: $6M$ and $3M$. The $6M$ orbit is a stable equilibrium, where as the $3M$ orbit is unstable - any perturbation will cause either escape or decay. The $3M$ orbit also requires the angular momentum to infinity, and the measured local speed is $1$ - only light can orbit circularly at this radius.

We again have a disagreement between the local measurement of speeds (shell observer) and the faraway measurement. Shell measures unity for light and bookkeeper finds the speed to depend on the r-coordinate. Using Eq 50 from Chapter 4 (4-30), the circular orbit where light would be measured to be at unity is at $r=M$.
