# 2021 MAY 20


## My Agenda

- Summer Plans?
  - Fridays might be good for meetings
- (small) MTH 537 Update
- Briefly Entertain Ch 3 Exercise 10?
- Chapter 4
- Chapter 5 next time?

### MTH 537 Update

Quick update:

We're slowly working through Einstein's equations. Started talking about the Stress-Energy Tensor and geodesic deviation.

### Chapter 4

We use **geodesics** to describe the paths taken by our test particles (stones) that are trying to follow the straightest possible worldlines as dictates by the Principal of Extremal Aging. These stones free-float throughout spacetime, and because they are non-accelerating, we can conclude that that total energy and angular momentum of the particle is a constant of its motion. In the Schwarzschild geometry, we note two coordinate symmetries present in the metric: $t$ and $\phi$. The metric depends on $dt$ and $d\phi$, but does not depend on the coordinates themselves in the same way it depends on $r$ (and $dr$).

The symmetry corresponding to $t$ is the Killing Vector $\vec{T}$ that is $\propto \frac{\partial}{\partial t}\hat{t}$. In EBH, we give this geodesic equation the name $E/m$, energy per unit mass:

$$\frac{E}{m} = \left(1-\frac{2M}{r}\right) \frac{dt}{d\tau}$$

Similarly, the symmetry that corresponds to $\phi$ is the Killing Vector $\vec{\Phi}\propto \frac{\partial}{\partial \phi}\hat{\phi}$. This geodesic equation is given the name of angular momentum and takes the form:

$$\frac{L}{m} = r^2 \frac{d\phi}{d\tau}$$

> **Note:** these quantities are conserved in Schwarzschild geometry, as derived by the Principal of Extremal Aging. They are not necessarily true in the presence of a rotating BH (as alluded by Taylor and Wheeler).

- Massive test particles of different mass follow these same worldlines; this is why we generalize to "per unit mass".

We use the above symmetries (and their geodesic equations) to map out the path of any stone in the presence of a Schwarzschild BH. We can use Newtonian Conservation of Energy to construct a general expression for how the presence of a Central Potential will effect the stone's worldline, however, the (correct) relativistic model requires the difference of squares[^1] :

$$\left(\frac{dr}{d\tau}\right)^2 = \left(\frac{E}{m}\right)^2 - \left(\frac{V}{m}\right)^2$$

> where $V/m$ is the Effective Potential.

We can then find any path for any stone by specifying the initial conditions of $E/m$ and $L/m$. Graphing this equation reveals a lot about each path taken, although care needs to be applied to the simplified 2D representation. As 4-9 points out, when $r\rightarrow 0$, $dr\rightarrow 0$, and so the graph doesn't show the turn around. This is because the simplified version we're using only has information from the first derivatives, not the second. We should probably also consult Penrose diagrams in these situations[^2].

### Special Case: Circular orbits

Circular orbits can only occur at two radii: $6M$ and $3M$. The $6M$ orbit is a stable equilibrium, where as the $3M$ orbit is unstable - any perturbation will cause either escape or decay. The $3M$ orbit also requires the angular momentum to infinity, and the measured local speed is $1$ - only light can orbit circularly at this radius.

We again have a disagreement between the local measurement of speeds (shell observer) and the faraway measurement. Shell measures unity for light and bookkeeper finds the speed to depend on the r-coordinate. Using Eq 50 from Chapter 4 (4-30), the circular orbit where light would be measured to be at unity is at $r=M$.


[^1]: There's also an interesting difference between the Newtonian and Relativistic discussions. As $r\rightarrow\infty$, the (Newtonian) (Effective) Potential fades to $0$, whereas the in Relativistic case, $V/m\rightarrow 1$ such that $dr/d\tau \rightarrow 0$.
  This is the stone coming to rest as it leaves curved spacetime, as we generally discuss with $E/m = 1$ when $r\rightarrow\infty$.

[^2]: A recent example of this is with the Reissner–Nordström metric. Plotting $dr/d\tau$ with respect to *shell* observers, we see the function stop at the horizontal axis $v=0$ before reaching $r=0$. The (Effective) Potential halts the pull of the stone towards the singularity, and because the geodesic in this region of spacetime is timelike, the stone is able to bypass the singularity and move on a forward facing timelike trajectory out into a *Them* region: escaping the BH.
