# 2021 APR 29


## My Agenda

- Discuss Chapter 3 Exercises & Possibly Chapter 4?
- Little bit of Project B

### Chapter 3

Notes:

In Exercise 5, we explore the limit case for a radially in-falling stone. We end up with a divergence in measured values of the stone between the shell and faraway observer.

- The faraway observer measures clock ticks absent the time dilation of the BH and sees that the infalling stone's speed decays to 0 as it reaches the horizon.
- The shell observer (stationed on the horizon as a limiting case) measures the stone to approach the speed of light as it falls in.

From these results, we seem to come to the conclusion that the speed of light now depends on the radial distance from the BH, but these results are actually consistent.

- The faraway observer, in this limit, requires absolute precise and powerful measuring equipment to observe the reducing intensity of light and lengthening wavelength caused by the gravitational redshift.
- The shell observer, locally, still measures light to move at the speed of light, irregardless of direction. It is only in the limit where the observer is **at** the horizon, that they measure a stone to approach the speed of light; as this rest frame is not actually possible, no observer can perform this measurement in practicality. (No rest frame at/below the horizon).

Phase velocity vs group velocity of light?

Does Redshifting/lensing effect the group velocity of a pulse?

### Project B

Query 1:

- 15 light-year mass
- 960 galaxies
- the horizon has a radius of 30 lightyears

Query 2:

- Did that
- Don't we expect infinite time if we start falling from infinitely far away?

Query 3:

$v = -\frac{2M}{r}^{1/2}$, so the length contraction factor really just simplifies to the curvature factor that is present for dr shell, and so they cancel.

Query 4:

In HW 4, we used geodesics to show that at each $r$ value inside the horizon, the rain frame finds that there is a minimum possible speed, using the limiting case that an object is place at rest on the horizon and falls in radially. For the rain frame, the speed is literally a ratio of $2M$ to $r$, and $r$ is less than $2M$ inside the horizon, so from the moment they enter the horizon, they have a lower bound of this speed.

Query 5:

- As before, in the limiting case of a shell observer on the horizon, we measure the rain observer to move at the speed of light as they cross.
- Is this not just the speed relation we derived for the rain observer?

Query 6:



Query 8:

The increasing magnitude of the curvature factor is canceled out by the length contraction of the rain frame.

### Chapter 4

Circular orbits can only occur at two radii: $6M$ and $3M$. The $6M$ orbit is a stable equilibrium, where as the $3M$ orbit is unstable - any perturbation will cause either escape or decay. The $3M$ orbit also requires the angular momentum to infinity, and the measured local speed is $1$ - only light can orbit circularly at this radius.

We again have a disagreement between the local measurement of speeds (shell observer) and the faraway measurement. Shell measures unity for light and bookkeeper finds the speed to depend on the r-coordinate. Using Eq 50 from Chapter 4 (4-30), the circular orbit where light would be measured to be at unity is at $r=M$.
