# 24 Aug 2020
## Topic 1: Negative Curvature

Today we talked about the work I did over the past two weeks. We discussed curvature of spacetime in trying to resolve the question about negative curvature of spacetime. We looked at: http://khadley.com/Courses/Astronomy/ph_207/topics/Cosmology/page-2.html for a visual example of what positive and negative curvature looks like. Dr. Hadley informed me that the L1 Lagrange point would be locally considered as negative curvature between two massive objects. She also informed me that we were discussing a "Manifold" (or Manifolds in the grander scheme) and the mathematical understanding should flow from this topic. She reassured me that the Math is only intimidating because I haven't done (or learned) it yet; like Calculus before taking Calculus.

## Topic 2: Gravitational Lensing

Along the way, we briefly transitioned to talking about Gravitational Lensing. We discussed at length what this is and how it works (pop culture reference: The shape of light around Gargantua in Interstellar) and how I might want to explore this topic more in-depth.

## Topic 3: Juno and Gravitational Redshift

Dr. Hadley pointed out that there are three types of shifting effects that we see:

* Cosmological Expansion -> Cosmological Redshift
* Gravity wells -> Gravitational Redshift
* Speed -> Doppler Effect

I guided her through my approach and we discussed my conclusion. We did note that there is a measurable effect, but it would be within the noise from the sending/receiving equipment, and significantly less impactful that the Doppler Effect from Juno's orbit and orbital velocity compared to Earth.

Dr. Hadley mentioned Dr. Xaiver Siemens as a person of interest we might want to get in contact with as the concepts of this side project appear to line up with his main area of research. We found a white paper he helped author called: "Pulsar Timing Arrays: Gravitational Waves from Supermassive Black Holes and More". Dr. Hadley recommended I try to give it a read and that we should follow up on it in the future.

I mentioned Jacob Taylor as a senior undergraduate who had just finished his thesis for Dr. Siemens and had done work with pulsar data. She further recommended that I reach out to him to ask for a copy of his thesis.

## End of Meeting

It was at this time that the meeting had gone 15 minutes past our scheduled time, so we briefly discussed what I would work on between now and next Monday. Dr. Hadley mentioned that she liked the precursor two day out email and asked for a similar one going forward regarding content I had covered and what we would discuss on Monday. She feels that I am sufficiently self motivated that she didn't strongly recommend topics or problems for me to work on and instead trusted myself to tackle content more freely.

My loose plan for topics covered by next Meeting are:

  1. Finish initial read of GSR
  2. Finish reread of EBH Ch 2
