---
title: 2A
subtitle: MTH 420, S2022
author: Thomas Knudson
date: Wednesday, March 30, 2022
papersize: a4
geometry: margin=2cm
header-includes: |
    \usepackage{pgfplots}
    \usepackage{hyperref}
    \usepackage{tikz,tikz-3dplot} 
    \usepackage{tkz-euclide}
    \usepackage{fancyhdr}
    \usepackage{float}
    \usepackage{subcaption}
    \pagestyle{fancy}
    \fancyhead[RO,RE]{MTH 420, S2022}
    \fancyhead[CO,CE]{2A}
    \fancyhead[LO,LE]{Knudson}
---
## (a) Read the first half of Section 1.4 in Strang (pp. 32-40 top of page, not Example 2). Reread as needed for complete understanding.

$$\ $$

## (b) Questions. Write clear responses to the following questions about the reading:

### (1) How is the matrix A in this section different from that in the previous section?

The matrix $A$ is now typically assumed to be rectangular ($m\times n$, $n\le m$). The product of $A^TA$, or $A^TCA$, is expected to be symmetric and positive definite in order to apply the concepts from the previous section.

### (2) In what way do quadratic functions enter into least squares problems?

Least squares problems are typically over determined ($m$ equations, $n$ unknowns, $m>n$). As a result, the least squares method involves finding the vector that satisfies $Ax=b$ with the minimal possible error $e$. Quadratic functions appear from finding the minimal error $e$ through the evaluation of the $x$ vector that causes the squared length of $e$ to be a minimum:

\begin{equation}
{\vert e \vert}^2 = {\vert Ax-b \vert}^2 = (Ax-b)^T (Ax-b).
\end{equation}

### (3) In what way do symmetric positive definite matrices enter into least squares problems?

If the product of $A^TA$, or $A^T C A$, is a symmetric positive definite matrix, we know from the theorems discussed in the previous section that this system is guaranteed to have a minimum. Since most least squares problems seek to model physical behaviour, we know there must exist some minimum for the corresponding quantity (energy, equilibrium, etc).

### (4) Give an additional question related to this reading (possibly about something well explained, or interesting, or confusing) and answer it if you can!

Could the least squares method be applied as an alternative method to finding the energy eigenstates of a perturbed quantum mechanical system?

I know that in QM we use perturbation theory to account for these effects which has a similar appearance to a power series expansion, 

\begin{equation}
H = H_0 + \epsilon H^\prime + ...,
\end{equation}

where $H$ is the complete Hamiltonian, $H_0$ is the unperturbed system, and $\epsilon H^\prime$ is the *very small* potential energy caused by the perturbation. We have algorithms for finding the $k$-th order correction, $\vert n^{(k)}\rangle$, to the unperturbed energy eigenstates $\vert n \rangle$, but I wonder if we can apply the least squares approach as a possibly faster method if we are only interested in finding the ground state of this new system.

## (c) Reflections. Write two or three sentences reflecting on the process of your work; this should only take a few minutes.  How did this assignment go? Was it pure review, or did you need to work hard to master these ideas?

This section definitely felt more intuitive when reading and with regards to why we might be motivated to learn about the least squares method. While we were not supposed to read Example 2, the accompanying figure did confirm my suspicions that this might be helpful in solving a coupled harmonic oscillator. It's great to see where the tricks/tools we use for more complicated physical situations have their roots.

## (d) Time. How much time did you spent on this assignment?

20 minutes for the first read through, 90 minutes to synthesize and write up.
