---
title: 3A
subtitle: MTH 420, S2022
author: Thomas Knudson
date: Monday, April 4, 2022
papersize: a4
geometry: margin=2cm
header-includes: |
    \usepackage{pgfplots}
    \usepackage{hyperref}
    \usepackage{tikz,tikz-3dplot} 
    \usepackage{tkz-euclide}
    \usepackage{fancyhdr}
    \usepackage{float}
    \usepackage{subcaption}
    \pagestyle{fancy}
    \fancyhead[RO,RE]{MTH 420, S2022}
    \fancyhead[CO,CE]{3A}
    \fancyhead[LO,LE]{Knudson}
---

## (a) Read the second half of Section 1.4 in Strang (pp. 40-44). Reread as needed for complete understanding.

## (b) Questions. Write clear responses to the following questions about the reading:

### (1) How is it that $x_0$ and $x_4$ are both zero if one represents the top and the other the bottom?

Given the physical situation illustrated by Figure 1.7, the system has Dirichlet boundary conditions for the two end nodes. Since both ends of the system (end of spring 1 and spring 4) are fixed in space, the nodes cannot be displaced and $x_0 = x_4 = 0$, $\forall t$.

### (2) Why must spring constants be positive?

As an analogy, if we consider the case that the sign of Newton's Gravitational constant were flipped, the lowest potential energy would correspond to each massive object being infinitely far away from each other. In the case that $k$ is negative, we obtain *anti-springs*. In a similar comparison, the minimum potential energy for this system corresponds to the spring completely stretching out. If we consider the energy that would be required to bring this system to a similar initial condition as presented in the model for this section, we can integrate the negative force and find each *anti-spring* would require infinite energy. This either means: we can never create this system, or a negative spring constant is nonphysical.

### (3) What is a positive matrix? (Note: not asking about a positive definite matrix.)

Strang doesn't elaborate too much, so I'm assuming you're looking for the straightforward answer: a positive matrix preserves the sign during multiplication. In the model, this corresponds to displacement occurring in the same direction as the force being applied.

### (4) Give an additional question related to this reading (possibly about something well explained, or interesting, or confusing) and answer it if you can!

When examining a ring of coupled oscillators, we (in PH 427: Periodic Systems) use what seems to be a similar method to the factorization. The spring (or stiffness) matrix $\mathbb{K}$ is decomposed into $-2I+S^\uparrow + S^\downarrow$, where the $S$ matrices correspond to "shifting" matrices.

\begin{equation*}
\begin{pmatrix} -2 & 1 & 0 & 1 \\ 1 & -2 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & -2 & 1 \\ 1 & 0 & 1 & -2 \end{pmatrix} = -2 \begin{pmatrix} 1 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \end{pmatrix} + \begin{pmatrix}  0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\ 1 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 \end{pmatrix} + \begin{pmatrix}  0 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\ 1 & 0 & 0 & 0  \end{pmatrix}
\end{equation*}

We then use the fact that $[S^\uparrow, K] = [S^\downarrow, K] = 0$ and find the eigenvectors for $\mathbb{K}$ by finding the eigenvectors of the $S$ matrices.

---

I understand that there is a notable difference here: decomposition into linear combination of matrices versus factorization of the product. However, given early content of Chapter 1, where Strang represents row operations as addition of matrices, I'm curious as to if there's a deeper underlying connection between the methods we are using in class and to this method for solving rings of coupled oscillators, or if I'm just trying to pattern match too much.

## (c) Reflections. Write two or three sentences reflecting on the process of your work; this should only take a few minutes.  How did this first preparation assignment go? Was it pure review, or did you need to work hard to master these ideas?

I believe this section went fairly well, but working on the B assignment will reveal if that's true. From what I can tell, this section is almost a review of content I've done in a physics course; so I'm not too startled with what is presented.

## (d) Time. How much time did you spent on this assignment?

20 minutes to read; 1 hour to synthesize thoughts and write up. Question 4 seems to be taking the most time of each of these assignments: trying to formulate a good question and exploring if I can expand upon or answer it.
