Last Updated: 10/17/2021 10:45 AM

# Differential Scattering Cross-sections and Maps of Schwarzschild Geometry for Massive and Massless Objects

$$\begin{aligned}
\text{Thomas Knudson} \qquad & \text{BSc. Physics, Mathematics Minor} \\
 & \text{Undergraduate Researcher, Oregon State University} \\
\\
\text{Kathryn Hadley, PhD} \qquad & \text{Research Advisor, Theoretical Astrophysics} \\
  & \text{Department of Physics, Oregon State University}
\end{aligned}$$

## Project Summary

The analysis of the kinematics objects traversing any geometry of spacetime is a fundamentally complicated and abstract process. Not only does the Physicist have to reset their Classical expectations and intuitions about the perceived order of events, duration of time, and length of distances measured in the context of spacetime, but they must also adopt a whole new suite of complex and compact notation. As a result, the representation for equations of motion take on an extremely foreign and difficult to interpret form. By creating a computational framework to wrangle these geodesic equations, we can provide a more accessible and intuitive interpretation for the trajectories of both massive and massless particles moving about a curved spacetime. The curvature of this spacetime will be generated by a single massive object with initial parameters matching the description of a Schwarzschild black hole, but the toolset will not be constrained to just the local regions about the black hole. The framework will be able to calculate and display the differential scattering cross sections of particles with variable parameters as they attempt to orbit the black hole and are either captured or flung free. In addition, velocity and acceleration vector field representations for each specified particle will be generated to map out local and global regions of the spacetime to assist in normalizing the Physicist's intuition in these extreme environments.

Time permitting, the codebase will be refined to be modular and well documented, with a particular addition focus on extendibility. This framework is intended to be integrated into similar codebases, such as either the Stardisk or Chimera projects. The underlying latticework of grid points will be implemented without assumptions of the underlying properties for the geometry of spacetime to facilitate straightforward modular extension for more complicated spacetimes such as the Reissner-Nordström or Kerr geometries.

## Project Description

<!-- tabs:start -->

<!-- tab:Introduction -->

### Introduction

When considering new systems and the interactions allowed by them, we tend to gravitate towards two main features: energy and kinematics. Classically, kinematics tends to be the root focus when being introduced to new and more complex systems: e.g., the equations of motion (EOM) for a harmonic oscillator are the cornerstone in understanding its behaviour and evolution through time. While this system is versatile as an approximation for other more complicated systems, we quickly disregard the vectors and trajectories in favor of a discussion about its energy. As we move away from Newtonian Mechanics, each system or formalism strongly suggests, if not outright requires, we abandon our familiar and direct kinematic equations for a more enigmatic exploration through energy conservation.

One such example of this shift is from Classical Thermodynamics into Statistical Mechanics. The student, eager to discuss small finite amounts of particles, immediately recognizes the futility attempting to use kinematics to describe the evolution of the system. On one hand, this can be expected of Quantum Mechanical systems, but these On the other, we have Special Relativity as the breaking point from everyday intuition with Galilean transforms to the less obvious Lorentz transforms which permits electromagnetic radiation to always move at the same speed.

Luckily, we are still able to discuss trajectories in this more complicated formalism, but they require different terminology. The most immediate consequence of the relativistic formalism is that time and space are no longer treated as distinct and separate objects, but as the same: spacetime. The method in which we measure distances in spacetime has also changed from the very familiar Pythagorean (or Euclidean) distance formula of $ds^2 = dx^2 + dy^2$ to one describe by hyperbolic geometry. Even in the simplest Minkowski space, $\mathbb{M}^2$, the line element takes on a distinctly different form, as we have adopted the Riemannian signature: $ds^2 = dx^2 - c^2 dt^2$.

In the exploration of flat spacetimes (or Minkowski space), we are introduced to the first drastic reset of expectations: observers measure different distances and times between events, and will sometimes even go as far as disagreeing about the order in which they occur. This is also when we must refresh and stress the importance of an inertial reference frame: a tool largely disregarded in undergraduate physics courses as Newtonian mechanics explicitly require them for his laws to be applied. From this reevaluation of what different observers see, we ultimately arrive at two invariant values: proper time and proper distance. While trivial seeming, these two tools become very powerful for the discussion and transformation between reference frames.

The next complication comes from Einstein considering the presence of massive objects on spacetime. Simply put: mass *distorts* or *curves* spacetime. The simplest and most prominent example of this is the Schwarzschild solution to Einstein's field equations, in which an isolated, non-rotating, and spherically symmetric massive object is placed at the origin. It is easy to see from the line element of this space why this particular geometry for spacetime is used as the first non-flat introduction to General Relativity:

$$ds^2 = -\left(1-\frac{2GM}{c^2 r}\right)(c^2 dt^2)+ \frac{dr^2}{\left(1-\frac{2GM}{c^2 r}\right)} + r^2 (\sin^2{\theta}d\varphi^2 + d\theta^2)$$

The next hurdle comes from length contraction and time dilation are also manifestations from curved spacetime, even when objects are moving at velocities slow enough to avoid the framework of Special Relativity. The subtle problem here is that now our grid that describes the *fabric* of spacetime is now also effected by the presence of massive objects. The short answer is that we can adopt a coordinate system that is immune to these effects and is either referred colloquially as the Schwarzschild or Bookkeeper's coordinates: $r,\theta,\varphi,t$. This type of coordinate system is a ***geometric*** representation of spacetime and somewhat annoyingly, does not have different symbols to signal this subtle difference from a spherical coordinate system that does experience the distortion in distances and times.

The path a free-falling object takes is always correspond to a straight worldline from the perspective of its rest frame. These paths adopt a special name: "geodesic", with a sub-classification that "null geodesics" are paths that can only be traveled by massless particles (those whose proper time is equal to its proper distance and the line element evaluates to $0$). Geodesic equations are the equivalent to the equations of motion from Classical kinematics and are the focus of this project.

$$\frac{1}{2}{\dot{r}}^2 = \frac{E^2 - kc^4}{2c^2} + k \frac{G_N M}{r} - \frac{{L_z}^2}{2r^2} + \frac{G_N M{L_z}^2}{c^2 r^3}$$

This is where the focus of this work is: to help translate the compact and foreign equations in General Relativity into visualizations that tie back to already existing intuitive skillsets.

<!-- tab:Plan of Work -->

### Plan of Work

We will study the equations of motion for massive and massless particles in the presence of curved spacetime. A Schwarzschild black hole will serve as the source of curvature for analysis of limiting cases that will be used as the foundation for sense making and error checking in computational runtimes.

The core of the toolset is going to depend on a series of key design and implementation decisions about the underlying framework. One of the key features is to have an intuitive code base for Physicists to use, which implies a latticework of grid points mapping out the space. Ideally, this latticework will be agnostic with respect to the active geometry and type of curvature. This stage will focus on the creation of the latticework, its documentation and the manifestation of key mathematical tools such as differential scattering and the representation and parameterization of a geodesic.
Part 1: Latticework and representation of spacetime

- Mathematical

<!-- tab:Timeline -->

### Timeline

This project has an immovable deadline of: Week 6 in Spring Term 2022. In order to meet this deadline, two major milestone deadlines have been created: one in Fall Term (2021) and one in Winter Term (2022).

The first Milestone is the completion of the Thesis Project Proposal and subsequent agreement by all involved parties that the project meets acceptable scope and requirements for the WIC requirement for a BSc in Physics. The timeframe of one year, Spring 2020 to 2021, was allotted for background research into General Relativity using literature sources and through courses offered by Oregon State University. Initial project concepts were outlined and tested during this timeframe as metrics for gauging understanding of relevant concepts. Week 0 through Week 6 of the Fall 2021 term have been assigned for finial project synthesis and formulation of Thesis Proposal.

The second Milestone is Week 6 of the Winter 2022 Term and is denoted by the completion of the Thesis document. Week 6 of Fall 2021 to January 2022 are earmarked for the code implementation and testing of the framework. Documentation of functionality will occur concurrently to aide in the drafting of the Thesis document, alongside additional literature review. MVP of framework should exist prior to finals week of Fall 2021 to allow for ample debugging and refactoring.

<!-- tab:Data Management -->

### Data Management & Materials/Equipment

To facilitate fast prototyping and quick iterations, Python 3 will be used as the base language for creation of the minimal viable product. The language is lightweight enough to allow for design, debugging, and testing to occur on a home computer. Ultimately this code base will be optimized to run on the HPC to allow for higher resolution plots (more expensive in terms of computational run time). A GitHub repository will serve as a version control source for the codebase throughout the lifetime of the project and as an off-site backup of work as the project continues. The repository can be expanded upon to document code functionality to both aide in the writing of the thesis and in the future usability of the framework.

<!-- tabs:end -->

---

# See Also

- [Conceptual Overview](/courses/PH403/Fall/ConceptualOverview.md)
- [Proposal Draft](/courses/PH403/Fall/ProposalDraft.md)
- [CV](/courses/PH403/Fall/CV.md)
